[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For centuries, humans
have tried to determine,
what is consciousness?
How are we able to think
and have free will?
A new scientific theory
says consciousness
may be electromagnetic.
This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Philosophers and scientists
have debated the nature
of consciousness for years.
Consciousness, put simply,
can be defined as "capable of,
or marked by, thought, will,
design, or perception."
But where does this
ability come from--
inside the brain or
some external force?
Johnjoe McFadden, Professor
of Molecular Genetics
at the University of
Surrey, has a new theory.
He calls this the Conscious
Electromagnetic Information,
or CEMI, Field Theory.
Professor McFadden explains.
>> The CEMI Field Theory is
simply that consciousness,
the physicality
of consciousness,
is actually the brain's
electromagnetic field.
Electromagnetic fields
unify all of the information
in the field.
This is the most important
feature of consciousness.
It's our unified thoughts.
And accounting for that the
binding problem has always
been the biggest problem
of consciousness,
the CEMI Field Theory solves
it with a physical structure
that we know is in our brain.
>> His theory states
electromagnetic energy runs
through our brains like
radio wave signals.
>> Well, every time
a neuron fires,
it sends a little pulse
of electromagnetic energy
into the surrounding space.
The physical entity
that you detect with EEG
is the pooled
electromagnetic field
created by the firing of
a hundred billion neurons
in your brain.
All the other theories
of consciousness
have always assumed that it's
the matter of your brain.
Then there's a
really big problem
with how is it all bound
together to make our thoughts.
That happens automatically
when neurons fire information
into the electromagnetic field.
It's like radio signals
and analog TVs and radios.
That's the information that
travels through the airwaves.
It's unified.
You can pick it up at
any point in space,
and it's got all
of the information
for movies, for radio shows.
All of that is there.
What I'm saying is
that's what our brain is.
It's a transmitter
of its thoughts
into the electromagnetic field.
And it's also the receiver
for those thoughts.
And going through that
circle of being transmitted
into the electromagnetic field
and then picked up by the brain
is what our thoughts are.
>> The classical theories
of consciousness have been
characterized as
something intangible.
Professor McFadden says
his theory can actually
be tested in a lab.
>> So we know that
electromagnetic fields--
external
influence the way we think.
Even without the
external stuff--
the helmet on your head,
or anyone else firing
electromagnetic
fields at the brain--
it's making its own
electromagnetic fields,
and that is influencing
how it works.
So that-- we have
already demonstrated
what we need to demonstrate--
is its functional significance,
that that is
particularly associated
with the conscious stuff.
But there's a lot of
circumstantial evidence
to indicate that
that's the case.
But it does need more
experimental data as well.
>> This could be more than
just an interesting theory.
If proven correct,
Professor McFadden
says there are real world,
practical applications
for this study on consciousness.
>> We know, for example, that
how physicians try to identify
whether patients in coma
are still active mentally is
actually looking at the
brain's electromagnetic fields
by techniques such
as EEG and MEG.
And by looking at the
dynamics of their activity,
they predict whether a
patient is thinking or not.
So we use that
information already.
It's just not translated into
the language of the CEMI Field
Theory in saying that the
reason why that's so useful--
looking at these
electromagnetic fields
to assess the level
of consciousness--
is because those electromagnetic
fields are consciousness.
So I think it's all
being used already.
We just have to
change our thinking
to realize that we're not just
a measure of consciousness--
the electromagnetic
field dynamics
in the brain-- they
are consciousness.
>> Could this controversial
theory put to rest the debate
over the nature
of consciousness?
Does the electric
field generated
by our brain's neurons
result in our ability
to think and have free will?
Professor McFadden hopes
to have laboratory test
results on his theory
within the next two years.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.